Editorial pass (#358)
quicwg/multipath: draft-ietf-quic-multipath.md

The path management specified in {{Section 9 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}
fulfills multiple goals: it directs a peer to switch sending through
a new preferred path, and it allows the peer to release resources

> associated with the old path. This multipath extension requires

Author: ```suggestion
associated with the old path. the multipath extension specified in this document requires
```

> associated with the old path. the multipath extension specified in this document requires

Author: ```suggestion
associated with the old path. The multipath extension specified in this document requires
```

the server MUST perform path validation ({{Section 8.2 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}})
unless it has previously validated that address.

If the transport parameter initial_max_paths is negotiated as N,
and the client is already actively using N paths, the limit is reached.
If the client wants to start a new path, it has to retire one of
the established paths.

Opening a new path requires the
use of a new connection ID (see {{Section 9.5 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}).
Instead of NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame as specified in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}},

> each endpoint uses the MP_NEW_CONNECTION_ID frames as specified in this extension

Author: ```suggestion
each endpoint uses the MP_NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame as specified in this extension
```

for all connection IDs associated to the Path ID of the abandoned path
to ensure that paths close cleanly and that delayed or reordered packets
are properly discarded.

> The effect of receiving a MP_RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame is specified in 

Author: ```suggestion
The effect of receiving a MP_RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame is specified in
```

even if there is no valid connection ID associated with the path, both endpoints can still send
multipath control frames that contain the Path ID (such as PATH_ABANDON, PATH_STANDBY or PATH_AVAILABLE)
on other available paths.
by sending ACK_MP frames on another path, if available.
Similarly it can still send multipath control frames for that Path ID
(such as PATH_ABANDON, PATH_STANDBY or PATH_AVAILABLE) on other available paths.

If the peer cannot send on a path and no data is received on the path, the idle time-out will close
the path. If, before the idle timer expires, a new connection ID gets issued
by its peer, the endpoint can re-activate the path by
sending a packet with a new connection ID on that path.

If the sender retires a connection ID that is still used by
in-flight packets, it may receive ACK_MP frames referencing the retired
connection ID. If the sender stops tracking sent packets with retired
connection ID, these would be spuriously marked as lost. To avoid such
performance issue without keeping retired connection ID state, an
endpoint should first stop sending packets with the to-be-retired
connection ID, then wait for all in-flight packets to be either

> acknowledged or marked as lost, and finally retire the connection ID.

Author: This was removed as the CID is not used in the ACK_MP frame anymore.

the ACK frame as well as packet protection as described in the following subsections.

When multipath is negotiated,
each path ID is linked to a separate packet number space.
When multipath is negotiated, separate packet number space is linked to a Path ID.
Each Path ID-specific packet number space starts at packet number 0. When following
the packet number encoding algorithm described in {{Section A.2 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}},
the largest packet number (largest_acked) that has been acknowledged by the
peer in this new connection ID's packet number space is initially set to "None".
peer in the Path ID-specfic packet number space is initially set to "None".

## Sending Acknowledgements

The ACK_MP frame, as specified in {{ack-mp-frame}}, is used to
acknowledge 1-RTT packets.
Compared to the QUIC version 1 ACK frame, the ACK_MP frame additionally
contains the receiver's Path ID associated with the Destination Connection ID
to distinguish the path-specific packet number space.

Acknowledgements of Initial and Handshake packets MUST be carried using
ACK frames, as specified in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}. The ACK frames, as defined
in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}, do not have a

> Path Identifier field to identify the path and this the packet number space.

Author: MUST has been removed because this is implicit as ACK_MP frames cannot be used before negotiation succeeded. Also the second sentence was removed because it is redundant.

> including 0-RTT packets, using the initial connection ID with

Author: ```suggestion
also for acknowledging so far unacknowledged 0-RTT packets, using
```

packet number is not a unique identifier anymore. This requires changes to
the ACK frame as well as packet protection as described in the following subsections.

When multipath is negotiated, separate packet number space is linked to a Path ID.
Each Path ID-specific packet number space starts at packet number 0. When following
the packet number encoding algorithm described in {{Section A.2 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}},
the largest packet number (largest_acked) that has been acknowledged by the
peer in the Path ID-specfic packet number space is initially set to "None".

## Sending Acknowledgements

The ACK_MP frame, as specified in {{ack-mp-frame}}, is used to
acknowledge 1-RTT packets.
Compared to the ACK frame as specified in {{Section 19.3 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}, the ACK_MP frame additionally
contains the receiver's Path ID to identify the path-specific packet number space.

> As multipath support is unknown during the handshake, acknowledgements of Initial and Handshake packets are sent using ACK frames.

Author: ```suggestion
As multipath support is unknown during the handshake,
acknowledgements of Initial and Handshake packets
are sent using ACK frames.
```

packet number is not a unique identifier anymore. This requires changes to
the ACK frame as well as packet protection as described in the following subsections.

When multipath is negotiated, separate packet number space is linked to a Path ID.
Each Path ID-specific packet number space starts at packet number 0. When following
the packet number encoding algorithm described in {{Section A.2 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}},
the largest packet number (largest_acked) that has been acknowledged by the
peer in the Path ID-specfic packet number space is initially set to "None".

## Sending Acknowledgements

The ACK_MP frame, as specified in {{ack-mp-frame}}, is used to
acknowledge 1-RTT packets.
Compared to the ACK frame as specified in {{Section 19.3 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}, the ACK_MP frame additionally
contains the receiver's Path ID to identify the path-specific packet number space.
As multipath support is unknown during the handshake,
acknowledgements of Initial and Handshake packets
are sent using ACK frames.
After the handshake concluded if negotiation of multipath support succeeded,
endpoints SHOULD use ACK_MP frames instead of ACK frames to acknowledge

> 1-RTT packets. Path ID 0 is used for the initial path.

Author: Acknowledgements of Initial and Handshake packets MUST be carried using
ACK frames, as specified in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}. The ACK frames, as defined
in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}, do not have a
Path Identifier field to identify the path and this the packet number space.
If the multipath extension has been successfully
negotiated, ACK frames in 1-RTT packets acknowledge packets for the path with
Path ID 0.

As soon as the negotiation of multipath support is completed,
endpoints SHOULD use ACK_MP frames instead of ACK frames to acknowledge application
data packets, including 0-RTT packets, using the initial connection ID with
Path ID 0 after the handshake concluded.

> As multipath support is unknown during the handshake,
> acknowledgements of Initial and Handshake packets
> are sent using ACK frames.
> After the handshake concluded if negotiation of multipath support succeeded,
> endpoints SHOULD use ACK_MP frames instead of ACK frames to acknowledge
> 1-RTT packets. Path ID 0 is used for the initial path.

Author: ```suggestion

Acknowledgements of Initial and Handshake packets MUST be carried using
ACK frames, as specified in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}. The ACK frames, as defined
in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}, do not have a
Path Identifier field to identify the path and this the packet number space.
If the multipath extension has been successfully
negotiated, ACK frames in 1-RTT packets acknowledge packets for the path with
Path ID 0.

As soon as the negotiation of multipath support is completed,
endpoints SHOULD use ACK_MP frames instead of ACK frames to acknowledge application
data packets, including 0-RTT packets, using the initial connection ID with
Path ID 0 after the handshake concluded.
```

packet number is not a unique identifier anymore. This requires changes to
the ACK frame as well as packet protection as described in the following subsections.

When multipath is negotiated, separate packet number space is linked to a Path ID.
Each Path ID-specific packet number space starts at packet number 0. When following
the packet number encoding algorithm described in {{Section A.2 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}},
the largest packet number (largest_acked) that has been acknowledged by the
peer in the Path ID-specfic packet number space is initially set to "None".

## Sending Acknowledgements

The ACK_MP frame, as specified in {{ack-mp-frame}}, is used to
acknowledge 1-RTT packets.
Compared to the ACK frame as specified in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}, the ACK_MP frame additionally
contains the receiver's Path ID to distinguish the path-specific packet number space.

> Acknowledgements of Initial and Handshake packets MUST be carried using

Author: ```suggestion
As multipath support is unknown during the handshake, acknowledgements of Initial and Handshake packets are be sent using
```

> Compared to the ACK frame as specified in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}, the ACK_MP frame additionally

Author: ```suggestion
Compared to the ACK frame as specified in {{Section 19.3 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}, the ACK_MP frame additionally
```

> contains the receiver's Path ID to distinguish the path-specific packet number space.

Author: ```suggestion
contains the receiver's Path ID to identify the path-specific packet number space.
```

> As multipath support is unknown during the handshake, acknowledgements of Initial and Handshake packets are be sent using

Author: ```suggestion
As multipath support is unknown during the handshake, acknowledgements of Initial and Handshake packets are sent using
```

ACK frames, as specified in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.

> As soon as the handshake concluded and the negotiation of multipath support is succeeded,

Author: ```suggestion
After the handshake concluded and negotiation of multipath support succeeded,
```

> As soon as  after the handshake concluded and the negotiation of multipath support is succeeded,

Author: ```suggestion
As soon as the handshake concluded and the negotiation of multipath support is succeeded,
```

> ACK frames, as specified in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.

Author: ```suggestion
ACK frames.
```

> After the handshake concluded and negotiation of multipath support succeeded,

Author: ```suggestion
After the handshake concluded if negotiation of multipath support succeeded,
```

> endpoints SHOULD use ACK_MP frames instead of ACK frames to acknowledge application

Author: ```suggestion
endpoints SHOULD use ACK_MP frames instead of ACK frames to acknowledge
```

> data packets, including 0-RTT packets, using Path ID 0 for the initial path.

Author: ```suggestion
data packets, including 0-RTT packets by using Path ID 0 for the initial path.
```

> data packets, including 0-RTT packets by using Path ID 0 for the initial path.

Author: ```suggestion
1-RTT packets. Path ID 0 is used for the initial path.
```

> Compared to the ACK frame as specified in {{Section 19.3 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}, the ACK_MP frame additionally
> contains the receiver's Path ID to identify the path-specific packet number space.
> 
> As multipath support is unknown during the handshake, acknowledgements of Initial and Handshake packets are sent using
> ACK frames.
> 
> After the handshake concluded if negotiation of multipath support succeeded,
> endpoints SHOULD use ACK_MP frames instead of ACK frames to acknowledge
> 1-RTT packets. Path ID 0 is used for the initial path.

Author: ```suggestion
Compared to the ACK frame as specified in {{Section 19.3 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}, the ACK_MP frame additionally
contains the receiver's Path ID to identify the path-specific packet number space.
As multipath support is unknown during the handshake, acknowledgements of Initial and Handshake packets are sent using ACK frames.
After the handshake concluded if negotiation of multipath support succeeded,
endpoints SHOULD use ACK_MP frames instead of ACK frames to acknowledge
1-RTT packets. Path ID 0 is used for the initial path.
```

packet number is not a unique identifier anymore. This requires changes to
the ACK frame as well as packet protection as described in the following subsections.

When multipath is negotiated, separate packet number space is linked to a Path ID.
Each Path ID-specific packet number space starts at packet number 0. When following
the packet number encoding algorithm described in {{Section A.2 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}},
the largest packet number (largest_acked) that has been acknowledged by the
peer in the Path ID-specfic packet number space is initially set to "None".

## Sending Acknowledgements

The ACK_MP frame, as specified in {{ack-mp-frame}}, is used to
acknowledge 1-RTT packets.
Compared to the ACK frame as specified in {{Section 19.3 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}, the ACK_MP frame additionally
contains the receiver's Path ID to identify the path-specific packet number space.

As multipath support is unknown during the handshake, acknowledgements of
Initial and Handshake packets are sent using ACK frames.
If the multipath extension has been successfully
negotiated, ACK frames in 1-RTT packets acknowledge packets for the path with
Path ID 0.

> As soon as the negotiation of multipath support is completed,

Author: ```suggestion
After the handshake concluded if negotiation of multipath support succeeded,
```

> endpoints SHOULD use ACK_MP frames instead of ACK frames.

Author: ```suggestion
endpoints SHOULD use ACK_MP frames instead of ACK frames,
```

In order to guarantee the uniqueness of the nonce, the nonce N is
calculated by combining the packet protection IV with the packet number
and with the least significant 32 bits of the Path ID with which
the Destination Connection ID is associated.
and with the least significant 32 bits of the Path ID.

{{mp-new-conn-id-frame}} encodes the Path ID for connection IDs
as a variable-length integer, allowing values up to 2^32-1;
in this specification, a range of less than 2^32-1

> values MUST be used before updating the packet protection key.

Author: This is not needed as the path ID cannot have a larger value that 2^32 - 1.

the Path ID is `3`, and the packet number is `aead`,
the nonce will be set to `6b2611489cba2b63a9e873e2`.

Due to the way the nonce is constructed, endpoints MUST NOT use more than 2^32

> connection IDs without a key update.

Author: This was removed as outdate. CID is not used anymore for the nonce.

Before the client opens a new path by sending a packet on that path
with a PATH_CHALLENGE frame, it has to check whether there is
an unused connection IDs for the same unused Path ID available for each side.
Respectively, the client chooses the connection ID S1

> as the Destination Connection ID of the new path.

Author: ```suggestion
as the Destination Connection ID of the new path.

If the client has used all the allocated connection IDs, it is supposed to retire
those that are not used anymore, and the server is supposed to provide
replacements, as specified in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.
Usually, it is desired to provide one more connection ID as currently
in use, to allow for new paths or migration.
```

Before the client opens a new path by sending a packet on that path
with a PATH_CHALLENGE frame, it has to check whether there is
an unused connection IDs available for each side.
In this example, the client chooses the connection ID S2
as the Destination Connection ID in the new path.
an unused connection IDs for the same unused Path ID available for each side.
Respectively, the client chooses the connection ID S1
as the Destination Connection ID of the new path.

If the client has used all the allocated connection IDs, it is supposed to retire
those that are not used anymore, and the server is supposed to provide
replacements, as specified in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.
Usually, it is desired to provide one more connection ID as currently

> in use, to allow for new paths or migration.

Author: This was moved into section 4.3.3 ([Allocating, Consuming and Retiring Connection IDs](https://quicwg.org/multipath/draft-ietf-quic-multipath.html#name-allocating-consuming-and-re))

ACK_MP[Path ID=1, PN=Y] ->
                            (server retires the corresponding CID)
           <- 1-RTT[V]: DCID=C2 RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID[Path ID1, Seq=0],
                                                ACK_MP[Path ID=1, PN=U]
~~~
{: #fig-example-path-close1 title="Example of closing a path."}

# Implementation Considerations

## Number Spaces

As stated in {{introduction}}, when the multipath extension is negotiated, each
path uses a separate packet number space.
This is a major difference from
{{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}, which only defines three number spaces (Initial,
Handshake and Application packets).

The relation between packet number spaces and paths is fixed.
Connection IDs are separately allocated for each Path ID.
Rotating the connection ID on a path does not change the Path ID.
NAT rebinding, though it changes the 4-tuple of the path,
also does not change the path identifier.
The packet number space does not change when connection ID
rotation happens within a given Path ID.

Data associated with the transmission and reception such RTT measurements,
congestion control state, or loss recovery are maintained per packet number

> space and as such per Path ID. 

Author: ```suggestion
space and as such per Path ID.
```

client is going to close the first path with Path ID 1 but it sends the
ABANBON frame over the second path using the DCID S2. In this example, the
server confirms the path closure by sending an PATH_ABANDON frame
by for the same Path ID to the client also using the other path with DCID C2.
Both the client and the server can close the path after receiving
the MP_RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame for that path.

~~~
Client                                                      Server

(client tells server to abandon a path)
1-RTT[X]: DCID=S2 PATH_ABANDON[Path ID=1]->
                           (server tells client to abandon a path)
               <-1-RTT[Y]: DCID=C2 PATH_ABANDON[Path ID=1],
                                               ACK_MP[PATH ID=1, PN=X]
(client retires the corresponding CID)
1-RTT[U]: DCID=S2 MP_RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID[Path ID=1, Seq=0],
ACK_MP[Path ID=1, PN=Y] ->
                            (server retires the corresponding CID)
           <- 1-RTT[V]: DCID=C2 RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID[Path ID1, Seq=0],
                                                ACK_MP[Path ID=1, PN=U]
~~~
{: #fig-example-path-close1 title="Example of closing a path."}

> 

Author: ```suggestion
After a path is abandoned, the path identifier associated with the path
is considered retired and MUST NOT be reused in new paths for security
considerations discussed in {{multipath-aead}}.

Endpoint SHOULD send MAX_PATHS frames {{max-paths-frame}} to raise
the limit of Path ID when endpoint finds there are not enough unused
Path ID (e.g. more than half of the available Path ID are used).

```

2.

Note that the paths use different packet number spaces. In this case, the
client is going to close the first path with Path ID 1 but it sends the
ABANBON frame over the second path using the DCID S2. In this example, the
server confirms the path closure by sending an PATH_ABANDON frame
by for the same Path ID to the client also using the other path with DCID C2.
Both the client and the server can close the path after receiving
the MP_RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame for that path.

~~~
Client                                                      Server

(client tells server to abandon a path)
1-RTT[X]: DCID=S2 PATH_ABANDON[Path ID=1]->
                           (server tells client to abandon a path)
               <-1-RTT[Y]: DCID=C2 PATH_ABANDON[Path ID=1],
                                               ACK_MP[PATH ID=1, PN=X]
(client retires the corresponding CID)
1-RTT[U]: DCID=S2 MP_RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID[Path ID=1, Seq=0],
ACK_MP[Path ID=1, PN=Y] ->
                            (server retires the corresponding CID)
           <- 1-RTT[V]: DCID=C2 RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID[Path ID1, Seq=0],
                                                ACK_MP[Path ID=1, PN=U]
~~~

> {: #fig-example-path-close1 title="Example of closing a path."}

Author: ```suggestion
{: #fig-example-path-close1 title="Example of closing a path."}

```

model the relations between paths and number spaces, as shown
in {{fig-number-spaces}}.

~~~
   +-------------------------+
   | CID received from peer: |-- - - - - - +
   | Sender Number Space     |             |
   +-------------------------+             v
                      ^             +----------------+
                      |             | Path (4 tuple) |
                      +-------------| - RTT          |
                +------------------>| - Congestion   |
                |                   |   state        |
                v                   +----------------+
   +-------------------------+             ^
   | CID provided to peer:   |             |
   | Receiver Number Space   |-- - - - - - +
   +-------------------------+
~~~
{: #fig-number-spaces title="Send and Receive number spaces"}

The path is defined by the 4-tuple through which packets are
received and sent. Packets sent on the path will include the
Destination Connection ID currently used for that path, selected
from the list of connection IDs provided by the peer. Packets received
on the path carry a Destination CID selected by the peer from

> the list provided to that peer.

Author: This was removed as number spaces are now per path ID and not changes with the CID.

Rotating the connection ID on a path does not change the Path ID.
NAT rebinding, though it changes the 4-tuple of the path,
also does not change the path identifier.
The packet number space does not change when connection ID
rotation happens within a given Path ID.

Data associated with the transmission and reception on a given
path can be associated to either the "path state", or to the
state of either the sender or receiver number spaces. For example:

* RTT measurements and congestion state are logically associated
  with the 4-tuple. They will remain unchanged if data starts
  being received or sent through the same 4-tuple using new
  connection IDs.

* Implementations of loss recovery typically maintain lists of
  packets sent and not yet acknowledged. Such information, along
  with the value of the next PN to use for sending, is
  logically associated with the "Sender Number Space", which remain
  unchanged when connection ID rotation happens.

* Sending of acknowledgement requires keeping track of the PN of
  received packets and of acknowledgements previously sent. Such
  information is logically associated with the "Receiver Number Space",

>   which remain unchanged when connection ID rotation happens.

Author: This was removed as per-packet number space and per path space is now the same. We might want to say something else instead. See issue #360

Maybe we can even remove the whole section?

could lead to switching between different paths, it should rather maintain
multiple open paths instead.

If an endpoint uses a new connection ID after an idle period
and a NAT rebinding leads to a 4-tuple changes on the same packet,
the receiving endpoint may not be able to associate the packet to
an existing path and will therefore consider this as a new path.
This leads to an inconsistent view of open paths at both peers,
however, as the "old" path will not work anymore, it will be silently

> closed after the idle timeout expires.

Author: This was removed entirely as this problem does not exist anymore with an explicit path ID.

The PATH_ABANDON frame informs the peer to abandon a path and retire the associated Path ID.

When there is not enough unused path identifiers, endpoints SHOULD

> send MAX_PATHS frame to inform the peer that new path identifiers are available.

Author: This moved down in the next section.

## MP_RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames {#mp-retire-conn-id-frame}

An endpoint sends a MP_RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame (type=0x15228c0a) instead of
RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame to indicate that it will no longer use a connection ID for a specific path

> that was issued by its peer. For Path ID includes the connection ID provided during the handshake.

Author: ```suggestion
that was issued by its peer. This includes the connection ID used
during the handshake for the initial path with Path ID 0.
```

## MP_RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames {#mp-retire-conn-id-frame}

An endpoint sends a MP_RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame (type=0x15228c0a) instead of
RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame to indicate that it will no longer use a connection ID for a specific path
that was issued by its peer. This includes the connection ID used
during the handshake for the initial path with Path ID 0.
Sending a MP_RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame also serves as a request to the peer
to send additional connection IDs for future use, unless the path specified
by the Path ID has been abandoned. New connection IDs can be

> delivered to a peer using the MP_NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame ({{mp-new-conn-id-frame}}).

Author: ```suggestion
delivered to a peer using the MP_NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame (see Section {{mp-new-conn-id-frame}}).
```
